Scheduling documentation (#1158)
zenml-io/zenml: docs/book/advanced-guide/pipelines/scheduling-runs.md

---
description: Schedule runs to add automation to your pipelines
---

In the world of MLOps, scheduling orchestration jobs is an important aspect of automating the processes involved in deploying and maintaining machine learning (ML) models in production environments. Scheduling orchestration jobs allows you to automate tasks such as training and evaluating ML models, deploying models to production, or running periodic checks to ensure that the models are functioning as expected. This can help ensure that your ML pipelines are executed at the right time and in the right order, and can save you time and effort by eliminating the need to manually trigger these tasks.

ZenML pipelines can also be used for scheduling orchestration jobs, but there are some limitations to consider. ZenML-powered orchestrators only support scheduling in certain orchestrators and setup (see below for details on what works and what doesn't), as they require something running in the background to trigger the pipeline runs. Despite these limitations, using scheduling with ZenML can be a useful way to automate your MLOps workflow and save time and effort.

> # How to schedule a pipeline run

Reviewer: Do we have a single `#` in all of our docs like this? I somehow remember we do ## ?

supported depends on the specific orchestrator you're using. For example, our
[Vertex Orchestrator](../../component-gallery/orchestrators/gcloud-vertexai.md) only supports the cron expression method (see below).

You could write a cron expression to describe the pipeline schedule in terms
that would be comprehensible as [a cron job](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cron). For example, if you wanted your pipeline to run at 14:05 on Wednesdays, you could use the following:

```python
from zenml.config.schedule import Schedule
from zenml.pipelines import pipeline

pipeline_instance = pipeline(step_one=..., step_two=...)

schedule = Schedule(cron_expression="5 14 * * 3")
pipeline_instance.run(schedule=schedule)
```

Alternatively, you could manually specify start and end times and the interval between runs. For example, if you wanted your pipeline to run once every 30 minutes starting right now, you could use the following:

```python
from zenml.config.schedule import Schedule
from zenml.pipelines import pipeline

pipeline_instance = pipeline(step_one=..., step_two=...)

schedule = Schedule(start_time=datetime.now(), interval_second=1800)
pipeline_instance.run(schedule=schedule)
```

> You can also optionally specify an `end_time` for the schedule if you want it not
> to run after a certain moment. Similarly, the boolean `catchup` parameter can be
> used to specify whether a recurring run should catch up (i.e. backfill pipeline
> runs) if it is behind schedule, if you paused the schedule, for example.
> 

Reviewer: Rephrasing to make a bit clearer IMO:

```suggestion
You can specify an optional `end_time` for the schedule to prevent it from running after a certain time. The `catchup` parameter, which is a boolean, can be used to specify whether a recurring run should catch up (i.e. backfill pipeline
runs) on missed runs if it has fallen behind schedule. This can happen, for example, if you paused the schedule.
```

In the context of scheduled cron or pipeline jobs, backfilling refers to running
a missed job for a specific period in the past. For example, if a pipeline
misses a scheduled run at 12:00 PM, backfilling can be used to run the pipeline
for the 12:00 PM time slot, in order to collect the missing data. This helps
ensure that the pipeline is up-to-date and that downstream jobs have the
necessary data to run correctly. Backfilling is a useful technique for catching
up on missed runs and filling in gaps in scheduled jobs, and can help ensure
that pipelines and cron schedules are running smoothly. Usually, if your
pipeline handles backfill internally, you should turn catchup off to avoid
duplicate backfill. (Here's [a handy
guide](https://medium.com/nerd-for-tech/airflow-catchup-backfill-demystified-355def1b6f92)

> in the context of Airflow.) Note that the `catchup` parameter enabling

Reviewer: I think the note should be in a `{% hint style="warning" %}{% endhint %}` in the next line

backfilling is not supported in all orchestrators.

# How to stop or pause a scheduled run

> The way pipelines are scheduled depends on the orchestrator you are using. For example, if you are using Kubeflow, you can use the Kubeflow UI to stop or pause a scheduled run. If you are using Airflow, you can use the Airflow UI to do the same. However, the exact steps for stopping or pausing a scheduled run may vary depending on the orchestrator you are using. We recommend consulting the documentation for your orchestrator to learn the current method for stopping or pausing a scheduled run.

Reviewer: Ok you should add here that currently ZenML only gets involved to initially schedule a job, and to maintain the lifecycle of the schedule is still on the user (with the methods you described).

Maybe explain what happens if you run a scheduled pipeline twice. @schustmi actually what happens in thsi case? Does it just create two pipelines with different names?
